Here is the lesson flow: (1)
introduction to antivirus software;
(2) how does antivirus software work and
(3) choosing the best antivirus software.
Introduction to Antivirus Software
A computer plugged into the internet is always
at high risk and it is always recommended
to install antivirus software onto the
system. A computer virus can degrade
the performance of a computer and delete stored
computer data. Viruses usually spread through
networks by means of download, email and shared
disk. If an infected file is attached to these
sources then the system is likely to become
infected upon opening the infected files.
Some of the symptoms indicating viral infection
are improper functioning of applications.
Slow operation and unusual error message, frequent
hanging, frequent restarting, problem sprinting,
double extension on any attachment, and distorted
menus and dialog boxes. An antivirus program
scans the hard drive and floppy disk to protect
the computer against viruses, worms, spywares,
trojans and more. It ensures that the system is
healthy and alerts the person to implement safety
measures against harmful attacks. Regularly update
the antivirus software by subscribing to the
updates from anti-virus vendors whenever offered.
The virus dictionary and the suspicious behavior
approaches are the most widely used approaches
by antivirus software to detect malware.
The Need for Antivirus Program
When a PC is connected to the internet, the
PC has to combat different malicious programs
such as viruses, worms,
trojans, spyware, and more.
Cyber criminals such as attackers, and hackers
use these malicious programs as tools to steal
important information such as personal data
stored in the computer. Due to the invasion of
malicious programs in the cyberspace, antivirus
programs have become necessary for computers.
How does antivirus software work?
Most of the commercial antivirus
software used two techniques: First, one
would be the virus dictionary approach
and the second one would be detecting
suspicious behavior from a computer program.
First one is the virus dictionary approach.
The antivirus software refers to the dictionary
of known viruses identified by the
author of the antivirus software.
The antivirus software can delete the file repair
the file by removing the virus or quarantine it to
make the file inaccessible to other programs. To
be successful, this approach requires the virus
dictionary to be updated with periodic online
downloads. The antivirus software usually examines
files when the OS creates opens and closes
the files as well as when they are emailed.
The software can be normally scheduled on
the hard disk to regularly examine the files.
The suspicious behavior approach include the
following: In this approach, the antivirus
software monitors the behavior of all programs
instead of identifying the known viruses. Whenever
the program its suspicious behavior is found the
software alerts the user and asks what to do.
This approach provides protection against new
viruses that do not exist in virus dictionaries.
There are other ways to detect viruses. First one
would be antivirus software will try to emulate
the beginning of each new executable code that
is being executed before transferring control to
the executable. If the program seems to be a virus
or using self-modifying code, then it immediately
examines the other executable programs. This
approach results in more false positives.
Sandbox is another kind of detection method
that emulates the OS and runs the executable
in situation. The sandbox is examined for a virus
after the termination of a program. It
is performed during an on-demand scans.
Choosing the Best Antivirus Software
When purchasing an anti-virus software,
look for certain features and choose the
one that can best serve your needs. The
most important things to consider are:
In antivirus scanning there should be antivirus
detection accuracy which ensures that the
anti-virus software scans and detects viruses
accurately and detects the majority of threats.
For the scanning speed, ensure that
the anti-virus software can perform
the task quickly and efficiently. For resource
utilization, ensures that the anti-virus software
utilizes minimal resources and does not affect
system performance when scanning the computer.
Next things to consider are the hacker
blocking which prevents other users from
gaining unauthorized access and stealing important
data such as passwords and other confidential
information. Next is the bidirectional firewall,
ensure that the antivirus software is equipped
with a software firewall to scan both incoming and
outgoing traffic. Next is the technical support,
look for good technical support so issues can be
solved easily. Parental controls - ensure that the
antivirus program has parental control features
so children can browse the internet safely.
Next is the easy installation the antivirus
software should be user friendly and easy to use.
The antivirus must also be on demand and
has a scheduled scanning. Allows you to schedule
a scan according to a user specified time
users can schedule the scan daily weekly or
monthly. The last three things to consider
in choosing the best antivirus software are
the automatic updates which keeps the user
abreast of the latest online threats without
the user having to visit the vendor's website.
Spyware detection and prevention which
checks for the anti-spyware components
keep spyware at bay and lastly, email
scanning email protection that can monitor
POP and SMTP ports and ensure that the emails
do not contain threat to your computer.